<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
		<head>
				<title>A Study of Woman</title>
				<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
				<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		</head>
		<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
				<article id="vendetta" epub:type="se:short-story">
						<h2 epub:type="title">A Study of Woman</h2>
<p>Dedicated to the Marquis Jean-Charles di Negro.</p>
<p>The Marquise de Listomère is a young woman brought up in the spirit of the Restoration. She has principles, she fasts in season, she takes the Sacrament, she goes very much dressed to balls, to the Bouffons, to the Opera; her spiritual director allows her to combine the sacred and the profane. Always on good terms with the Church and the world, she is an incarnation of the present time, and seems to have taken the word <i>Legality</i> for her motto. The Marquise's conduct is marked by exactly enough devotion to enable her, under another Maintenon, to achieve the gloomy piety of the last days of Louis XIV, and enough worldliness to adopt the manners and gallantry of the earlier years of his reign, if they ever could return.</p>
<p>Just now she is virtuous from interest, or, perhaps, by taste. Married some seven years since to the Marquis de Listomère, a deputy who expects a peerage, she perhaps thinks that her conduct may promote the ambitions of the family. Some women wait to pass judgment on her till Monsieur de Listomère is made Pair de France, and till she is six-and-thirty—a time of life when most women discover that they are the dupes of social laws.</p>
<p>The Marquis is an insignificant personage; he is in favor at Court; his good qualities, like his faults, are negative; the former can no more give him a reputation for virtue than the latter can give him the sort of brilliancy bestowed by vice. As a deputy he never speaks, but he votes "straight"; and at home, he behaves as he does in the Chamber. He is considered the best husband in France. Though he is incapable of enthusiasms, he never scolds, unless he is kept waiting. His friends nickname him "Cloudy weather"; and, in fact, there is in him no excessively bright light, and no utter darkness. He is exactly like all the Ministers that have succeeded each other in France since the Charter.</p>
<p>A woman with principles could hardly have fallen into better hands. Is it not a great thing for a virtuous woman to have married a man incapable of a folly? Dandies have been known to venture on the impertinence of slightly pressing the Marquise's hand when dancing with her; they met only looks of scorn, and all have experienced that insulting indifference which, like spring frosts, chills the germs of the fairest hopes. Handsome men, witty men, coxcombs, sentimental men who derive nourishment from sucking the knob of their walking-sticks, men of name and men of fame, men of high birth and of low, all have blenched before her. She has won the right of talking as long and as often as she pleases with men whom she thinks intelligent, without being entered in the calendar of scandal. Some coquettes are capable of pursuing this plan for seven years on end, to gratify their fancy at last; but to ascribe such a covert motive to Madame de Listomère would be to calumniate her. I had been so happy as to meet this Phoenix of a Marquise; she talks well, I am a good listener. I pleased her, and I go to her evening parties. This was the object of my ambition.</p>
<p>Neither plain nor pretty, Madame de Listomère has white teeth, a brilliant complexion, and very red lips; she is tall and well made, has a small, slender foot, which she does not display; her eyes, far from being dulled, as most eyes are in Paris, have a soft gleam which becomes magical when by chance she is animated. You feel there is a soul under this ill-defined personality. When she is interested in the conversation, she reveals the grace that lies buried under the prudery of cold demeanor, and then she is charming. She does not crave for success, and she gets it. We always find the thing we do not seek. This statement is too often true not to become a proverb one day. It will be the moral of this tale, which I should not allow myself to relate if it were not at this moment the talk of every drawing-room in Paris.</p>
<p>One evening, about a month since, the Marquise de Listomère danced with a young man as modest as he is heedless, full of good qualities, but showing only his bad ones; he is impassioned, and laughs at passion; he has talent, and hides it; he assumes the <i>savant</i> with aristocrats, and affects to be aristocratic with savants.</p>
<p>Eugène de Rastignac is one of those very sensible young men who try everything, and seem to sound other men to discover what the future will bring forth. Pending the age when he will be ambitious, he laughs at everything; he has grace and originality—two qualities which are rare, because they exclude each other. "Without aiming at success, he talked to Madame de Listomère for about half an hour. "Without following the deviations of a conversation which, beginning with <i>William Tell</i>, went on to the duties of woman, he looked at the Marquise more than once in a way to embarrass her; then he left her, and spoke to her no more all the evening. He danced, sat down to <i>écarté</i>, lost a little money, and went home to bed. I have the honor of assuring you that this is exactly what happened. I have added, I have omitted nothing.</p>
<p>The next morning Rastignac woke late, remained in bed, where he gave himself up, no doubt, to some of those morning day-dreams in which a young man glides, like a sylph, behind more than one curtain of silk, wool, or cotton. At such moments, the heavier the body is with sleep, the more nimble is the fancy. Finally Rastignac got up without yawning too much, as so many ill-bred people do, rang for his manservant, ordered some tea, and drank of it immoderately—which will not seem strange to those who like tea; but, to account for this to those persons who only regard tea as a panacea for indigestion, I will add that Eugène was writing; he sat at his ease, and his feet were more often on. the firedogs than in his foot-muff.</p>
<p>Oh! to sit with your feet on the polished bar that rests on the two brackets of a fender, and dream of your love affairs while wrapped in your dressing-gown, is so delightful a thing, that I deeply regret having no mistress, no fire-dogs, and no dressing-gown. When I shall have all those good things, I shall not write my experiences, I shall take the benefit of them.</p>
<p>The first letter Eugène had to write was finished in a quarter of an hour. He folded it, sealed it, and left it lying in front of him without any address. The second letter, begun at eleven o'clock, was not finished till noon. The four pages were written all over.</p>
<p>"That woman runs in my head," said he to himself as he folded the second missive, leaving it there, and intending to address it after ending his involuntary reverie. He crossed the fronts of his flowered dressing-gown, put his feet on a stool, stuffed his hands into the pockets of his red cashmere trousers, and threw himself back in a delicious armchair with deep ears, of which the seat and back were set at the comfortable angle of a hundred and twenty degrees. He drank no more tea, but remained passive, his eyes fixed on the little gilt fist which formed the knob of his fire-shovel, without seeing the shovel, or the hand, or the gilding. He did not even make up the fire. This was a great mistake! Is it not an intense pleasure to fidget with the fire when dreaming of women? Our fancy lends speech to the little blue tongues which suddenly burst up and babble on the hearth. We can find a meaning in the sudden and noisy language of a <i>bourguignon</i>.</p>
<p>At this word I must pause and insert, for the benefit of the ignorant, an explanation vouchsafed by a very distinguished etymologist, who wishes to remain anonymous. <i>Bourguignon</i> is the popular and symbolical name given, ever since the reign of Charles VI, to the loud explosions which result in the ejection on to a rug or a dress of a fragment of charcoal, the germ of a conflagration. The heat, it is said, explodes a bubble of air remaining in the heart of the wood, in the trail of some gnawing grub. <i>Inde amor, inde Burgunatis.</i> We quake as we see the charred pieces coming down like an avalanche when we had balanced them so industriously between two blazing logs. Oh! making up a wood-fire when you are m love is the material expression of your sentiments.</p>
<p>It was at this moment that I entered Eugène's room; he started violently, and said:</p>
<p>"So there you are, my dear Horace. How long have you been here?"</p>
<p>"I have this moment come."</p>
<p>"Ah!"</p>
<p>He took the two letters, addressed them, and rang for his servant.</p>
<p>"Take these two notes."</p>
<p>And Joseph went without a remark. Excellent servant!</p>
<p>And we proceeded to discuss the expedition to the Morea, in which I wanted to be employed as surgeon. Eugène pointed out that I should lose much by leaving Paris, and Ave then talked of indifferent things. I do not think that I shall be blamed for omitting our conversation.</p>

<p>When Madame de Listomère rose at about two in the afternoon, her maid Caroline handed her a letter, which she read while Caroline Avas dressing her hair. (An imprudence committed by a great many young wives.)</p>
<p>"Ah, dear angel of love, my treasure of life and happiness!"—on reading these words, the Marquise was going to throw the letter into the fire; but a fancy flashed through her head, which any virtuous woman will understand to a marvel, namely, to see how a man might end who began in this strain. She read on. When she turned her fourth page, she dropped her arms like a person who is tired.</p>
<p>"Caroline," said she, "go and find out who left this letter for me."</p>
<p>"Madame, I took it from M. le Baron de Rastignac's manservant."</p>
<p>There was a long silence.</p>
<p>"Will madame dress now?"</p>
<p>"No."</p>
<p>"He must be excessively impertinent!" thought the Marquise.—I may ask any woman to make her own commentary.</p>
<p>Madame de Listomère closed hers with a formal resolution to shut her door on Monsieur Eugène, and, if she should meet him in company, to treat him with more than contempt; for his audacity was not to be compared with any of the other instances which the Marquise had at last forgiven. At first she thought she would keep the letter, but, on due reflection, she burned it.</p>
<p>"Madame has just received such a flaming love-letter, and she read it!" said Caroline to the housemaid.</p>
<p>"I never should have thought it of madame," said the old woman, quite astonished.</p>
<p>That evening the Marquise was at the house of the Marquis de Beauséant, where she would probably meet Rastignac. It was a Saturday. The Marquis de Beauséant was distantly related to Monsieur de Rastignac, so the young man could not fail to appear in the course of the evening. At two in the morning, Madame de Listomère, who had stayed so late solely to crush Eugène by her coldness, had waited in vain. A witty writer, Stendahl, has given the whimsical name of crystallization to the process worked out by the Marquise's mind before, during, and after this evening.</p>
<p>Four days later Eugène was scolding his man-servant.</p>
<p>"Look here, Joseph; I shall be obliged to get rid of you, my good fellow."</p>
<p>"I beg your pardon, sir?"</p>
<p>"You do nothing but blunder. Where did you take the two letters I gave you on Friday?"</p>
<p>Joseph was bewildered. Like a statue in a cathedral porch he stood motionless, wholly absorbed in the travail of his ideas. Suddenly he smiled foolishly, and said:</p>
<p>"Monsieur, one was for Madame la Marquise de Listomère, Rue Saint-Dominique, and the other was for Monsieur's lawyer—"</p>
<p>"Are you sure of what you say?"</p>
<p>Joseph stood dumfounded. I must evidently interfere—happening to be present at the moment.</p>
<p>"Joseph is right," said I. Eugène turned round to me. "I read the addresses quite involuntarily, and—"</p>
<p>"And," said Eugène, interrupting me, "was not one of them for Madame de Nucingen?"</p>
<p>"No, by all the devils! And so I supposed, my dear boy, that your heart had pirouetted from the Rue Saint-Lazare to the Rue Saint-Dominique."</p>
<p>Eugène struck his forehead with the palm of his hand, and began to smile. Joseph saw plainly that the fault was none of his.</p>
<p>Now, there are certain moral reflections on which all young men should meditate. Mistake the first: Eugène thought it amusing to have made Madame de Listomère laugh at the blunder that had put her in possession of a love-letter which was not intended for her. Mistake the second: He did not go to see Madame de Listomère till four days after the misadventure, thus giving the thoughts of a virtuous young woman time to crystallize. And there were a dozen more mistakes which must be passed over in silence to give ladies <i>ex professo</i> the pleasure of deducing them for the benefit of those who cannot guess them.</p>
<p>Eugène arrived at the Marquise's door; but as he was going in, the porter stopped him, and told him that Madame de Listomère was out. As he was getting into his carriage again, the Marquis came in.</p>
<p>"Come up, Eugène," said he; "my wife is at home."</p>
<p>Oh! forgive the Marquis. A husband, however admirable, scarcely ever attains to perfection.</p>
<p>Rastignac as he went upstairs discerned the ten fallacies in worldly logic which stood on this page of the fair book of his life.</p>
<p>When Madame de Listomère saw her husband come in with Eugène, she could not help coloring. The young Baron observed the sudden flush. If the most modest of men never quite loses some little dregs of conceit, which he can no more get rid of than a woman can throw off her inevitable vanities, who can blame Eugène for saying to himself, "What! this stronghold too?" and he settled his head in his cravat. Though young men are not very avaricious, they all love to add a head to their collection of medals.</p>
<p>Monsieur de Listomère seized on the <i>Gazette de France</i>, which he saw in a corner by the fireplace, and went to the window to form, by the help of the newspaper, an opinion of his own as to the state of France. No woman, not even a prude, is long in embarrassment even in the most difficult situation in which she can find herself; she seems always to carry in her hand the fig-leaf given to her by our mother Eve. And so, when Eugène, having interpreted the orders given to the porter in a sense flattering to his vanity, made his bow to Madame de Listomère with a tolerably deliberate air, she was able to conceal all her thoughts behind one of those feminine smiles, which are more impenetrable than a King's speech.</p>
<p>"Are you unwell, madame? You had closed your door."</p>
<p>"No, monsieur."</p>
<p>"You were going out perhaps?"</p>
<p>"Not at all."</p>
<p>"You are expecting somebody?"</p>
<p>"Nobody."</p>
<p>"If my visit is ill timed, you have only the Marquis to blame. I was obeying your mysterious orders when he himself invited me into the sanctuary."</p>
<p>"Monsieur de Listomère was not in my confidence. There are certain secrets which it is not always prudent to share with one's husband."</p>
<p>The firm, mild tone in which the Marquise spoke these words, and the imposing dignity of her glance, were enough to make Rastignac feel that he had been in too much haste to plume himself.</p>
<p>"I understand, madame," said he, laughing; "I must therefore congratulate myself all the more on having met Monsieur le Marquis; he has procured me an opportunity for offering you an explanation, which would be fraught with danger, but that you are kindness itself."</p>
<p>The Marquise looked at the young Baron with considerable astonishment, but she replied with dignity.</p>
<p>"On your part, monsieur, silence will be the best excuse. On my side I promise you to forget entirely—a forgiveness you scarcely merit."</p>
<p>"Forgiveness is needless, madame, when there has been no offence.—The letter you received," he added in an undertone, "and which you must have thought so unseemly, was not intended for you."</p>
<p>The Marquise smiled in spite of herself; she wished to appear offended.</p>
<p>"Why tell a falsehood?" she replied with an air of disdainful amusement, but in a very friendly tone. "Now that I have scolded you enough, I am quite ready to laugh at a stratagem not devoid of skill. I know some poor women who would be caught by it. 'Good heavens, how he loves me!' they would say." She forced a laugh, and added with an indulgent air, "If we are to remain friends, let me hear nothing more of mistakes of which I cannot be the dupe."</p>
<p>"On my honor, madame, you are far more so than you fancy," Eugène eagerly replied.</p>
<p>"What are you talking about?" asked Monsieur de Listomère, who for a minute had been listening to the conversation, without being able to pierce the darkness of its meaning.</p>
<p>"Oh, nothing that will interest you," said Madame de Listomère.</p>
<p>The Marquis quietly returned to his paper, saying, "I see Madame de Mortsauf is dead; your poor brother is at Clochegourde no doubt."</p>
<p>"Do you know, monsieur," said the Marquise, addressing Eugène, "that you have just made a very impertinent speech?"</p>
<p>"If I did not know the strictness of your principles," he replied simply, "I should fancy you either meant to put ideas into my head which I dare not allow myself, or to wring my secret from me; or perhaps, indeed, you wish to make fun of me."</p>
<p>The Marquise smiled. This smile put Eugène out of patience.</p>
<p>"May you always believe, madame, in the offence I did not commit!" said he. "And I fervently hope that chance may not lead you to discover in society the person who was intended to read that letter—"</p>
<p>"What! Still Madame de Nucingen?" cried Madame de Listomère, more anxious to master the secret than to be revenged on the young man for his retort.</p>
<p>Eugène reddened. A man must be more than five-and-twenty not to redden when he is blamed for the stupid fidelity which women laugh at only to avoid betraying how much they envy its object. However, he said, calmly enough, "Why not, madame?"</p>
<p>These are the blunders we commit at five-and-twenty. This confession agitated Madame de Listomère violently; but Eugène was not yet able to analyze a woman's face as seen in a glimpse, or from one side. Only her lips turned white. She rang to have some wood put on the fire, and so obliged Eugène to rise to take leave. "If that is the case," said the Marquise, stopping Eugène by her cold, precise manner, "you will find it difficult, monsieur, to explain by what chance my name happened to come to your pen. An address written on a letter is not like the first-come crush hat which a man may heedlessly take for his own on leaving a ball."</p>
<p>Eugène, put quite out of countenance, looked at the Marquise with a mingled expression of stupidity and fatuousness; he felt that he was ridiculous, stammered out some schoolboy speech, and left. A few days later Madame de Listomère had indisputable proof of Eugène's veracity.</p>
<p>For more than a fortnight she has not gone into society.</p>
<p>The Marquis tells every one who asks him the reason of this change:</p>
<p>"My wife has a gastric attack."</p>
<p>I, who attend her, and who know her secret, know that she is only suffering from a little nervous crisis, and takes advantage of it to stay quietly at home.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
